+++

# Project title.

title = "Mimosa"

# Date this page was created.

date = 2016-11-27T00:00:00

# Project summary to display on homepage.

summary = "Providing 5G fixed wireless networks as a low-cost alternative to fibre globally"

# Tags: can be used for filtering projects.

# Example: `tags = ["machine-learning", "deep-learning"]`

tags = ["North America", "Fixed Wireless"]

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).

external_link = ""

# Slides (optional).

# Associate this project with Markdown slides.

# Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.

# E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references 

# `content/slides/example-slides.md`.

# Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.

slides = ""

# Links (optional).

url_pdf = "northamerica_fixedwireless_mimosafixedwirelessus.pdf"
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Custom links (optional).

# Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.

# url_custom = [{name="Photos", url = ""}]

# Featured image

# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your project's folder. 

[image]

# Caption (optional)

caption = "*A mimosa router. Photo credit: Mimosa*"

# Focal point (optional)

# Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight

focal_point = "Smart"

+++

Executive Summary 
==================

Mimosa is a privately-owned technology company from Santa Clara,
California. The company provides 5G mobile fixed-wireless technology to
Internet service providers (ISPs) as a low-cost alternative to fiber
optics. Their technology makes efficient use of available spectrum, and
is also able to avoid interference by reusing channels rather than
wasting additional spectrum. They use multiple in/multiple out (MIMO)
and Global Positioning System (GPS)-based synchronization technologies
to extend the capacity of the spectrum and allow for repeated channel
reuse without interference. Currently, their products are providing
improved connectivity all around the world, from rural areas to densely
populated cities.

*Keywords: 5G fixed wireless, rural, deployment, last mile connectivity,
California*

Project Description
===================

Launched in 2012, Mimosa is a technology company whose products are used
all around the world in a variety of environments, from underserviced
rural settings to densely packed cities. Mimosa uses two main
technologies, MicroPoP and GigaPoP, along with Spectrum Reuse
Synchronization (SRS) to provide affordable, fast, and scalable Internet
connectivity solutions. Additionally, unlike fiber-optic connectivity,
Mimosa's 5G, fixed-wireless solution offers a return on investment that
can be delivered within six-to-12 months on average.

**Spectrum Reuse Synchronization --** This technology allows for ample
scaling of wireless networks by eliminating outside interference through
highly coordinated transmissions. This allows access points to reuse
channels and make efficient use of the limited available spectrum. This
allows for greater subscriber capacity, which is useful in densely
populated areas, and faster speeds.

**GigaPoP Broadband Architecture** -- Used in rural areas where there
are limited options for tower locations, this technology allows for
scaling of existing towers in addition to allowing for new locations by
reusing spectrum. In rural areas, ISPs face issues of line of sight and
distance; this can inhibit Internet quality and speed, so new towers and
base station sectors must be built. GigaPoP allows for sectors to be
closer together and with the help of SRS, subscriber capacity can be
increased with no additional interference.

**MicroPoP Broadband Architecture --** This technology is used in dense
urban and suburban areas. It targets 250-500 megabit per second (Mbps)
speeds, and its price is comparable to that of digital subscriber line
(DSL), cable, and fiber. Each deployment of MicroPoP is able to serve
400-1200 households per square kilometers, which is the typical density
of their suburban residential markets.

Through the use of the above technologies, Mimosa has been able to
achieve last mile connectivity as well as provide 5G fixed solutions for
competitive underserviced markets.

# Project Details
|                          |                                                         |                              |                          |
| :----------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------ | :--------------------------- | :----------------------- |
| **Technology**           | 5G fixed wireless                                       | **Training**                 | Not provided             |
| **Year program started** | 2012                                                    | **Cost to users**            | $225-$350 per subscriber |
| **Geography**            | Various â€“ from rural areas to densely populated cities. | **Total cost of program**    | Undisclosed              |
| **User profile**         | Varies                                                  | **Associated organizations** | None                     |

Progress and Results
====================

Mimosa has been successful in overcoming the typical issues faced by
ISPs including line of sight, foliage, and distance in rural areas as
well as limited subscriber capacity in densely populated areas.

Mimosa's networks have been deployed around the globe. Some examples
include:

**Houston, Missouri --** In the town of Houston, MO, Mimosa teamed up
with a rural power cooperative's communications subsidiary to bring
high-speed Internet to the town. Since utility companies often already
have networks in place due to their previous business, Mimosa helps them
bring fixed wireless into the communities they service.

**The CountryFlo Music Festival, Florida --** The networks can also be
setup for ephemeral needs. The CountryFlo Music Festival in Florida
needed high-speed Internet for attendees and dedicated Wi-Fi hotspots
for vendors. Mimosa provided wireless to all 10,000+ attendees and
vendors.

**Swiss Wrestling and Alpine Festival, Switzerland --** The organizers
of this festival appointed Swisscom to deliver the network for this
event. In attempting to connect nearby temporary restaurants, fields,
and a campsite to the network, Swisscom realized they needed to upgrade
its backhaul solution due to obstacles such as radars from a nearby
Swiss Military Airforce Airbase. Mimosa provided backhaul radios that
were optimal for maintaining link stability.

**Sofitec, Spain --** This leader in the aerospace industry was moving
to expand operations with a new plant in Southern Spain and needed a
point-to-point network that could handle high interference and great
distances. The company sought out Wellness Telecom who recommended the
Mimosa B5 backhaul radio as the prime solution.

**Boundless Networks, U.K. --** This wireless Internet service provider
was looking to become the U.K.'s best broadband provider in rural areas.
In order to do so, the company needed to upgrade its backhaul system to
better provide more stable, robust, and reliable high-speed connections.
They decided to use Mimosa's technology, which enables improved
performance for an increasingly congested space.

**XCIEN, Mexico --** In Mexico, an ISP called XCIEN, whose backbone
network covers more than 4,000 km^2^ and eight Mexican metro areas,
wanted to provide reliable, high-speed Internet to subscribers in both
dense urban areas and remote rural locales. By using Mimosa's
technology, they were able to cut installation times and spike speeds
their customer's would receive. In addition, XCIEN was able to cut its
costs by 25 percent.

Challenges
==========

**Regulatory challenges --** Mimosa operates and sells their technology
all around the world, including many developing countries such as
Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Mexico. They have also worked in India,
however, the country is not regulatory favorable. Mimosa is an
unlicensed technology company and in the Indian market, most of the
spectrum is licensed or used illegally. Additionally, Mimosa has found
that while demand is particularly high in developed markets such as the
United States, these are also the areas hardest to operate in because
they have the most rules and regulations surrounding this type of
service.

**Differences in partners' capacity--** In the developing world, there
may be fewer rules and regulations surrounding the wireless Internet
industry; however, Mimosa must deal with ISPs that have very little
revenue. These providers tend to build at a much slower pace, as they
might only have a few dollars per month as revenue from their
subscribers.

Mimosa's Suggestions for Future Projects
========================================

**Varying markets have varying needs --** Depending on the level of
maturity of the pre-existing wireless technology in the target market,
different technologies, architectures, and strategies must be used to
provide optimal service. For example, in developing markets such as
those found in Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Mexico, there is very
little fiber-optic cable interconnecting towns; thus, these areas are
already accustomed to doing backhaul between two villages. As a result,
Mimosa's technology gained traction relatively quickly in those fixed
wireless markets. In Mexico, Mimosa started to see that even newly
populated areas lacked necessary infrastructure and with a higher
density in these areas, it became necessary to leverage spectrum reuse
rather than relying on traditional fixed wireless.

**Versatility is important while serving diverse markets --** The
variety of products and technology that Mimosa offers allows the company
to service different areas with different needs. For example, Mimosa has
been able to partner with satellite companies in parts of Africa who
have found the most cost effective method to be bringing a satellite
signal directly to the village and then using Mimosa's gear to
distribute it with point-to-multipoint, and then further distribute
Wi-Fi at the end of those points. In areas where the need is in last
mile connectivity, Mimosa is able to utilize its GigaPoP technology
whereas in higher density markets, smaller MicroPoP hub locations are
effective.

**New trends and customers should be sought out --** In cities, Mimosa
has recently seen utilities companies stepping up to leverage their own
infrastructure, which has led to regionalization of utility companies.
These companies are using their advantage over outsiders to expand their
services to not only include gas and electrical but also Internet. These
companies already have the work force necessary to complete the job as
well as the concept of being able to offer services to people in their
market.

Sources 
========

Fink, J. (2017, May 20) Personal Interview

Fink, J. (n.d.). "High speed fixed wireless Internet for rural
communities." Mimosa webinar. Available at: [http://mimosa.co/tothepoint](http://mimosa.co/tothepoint)
