+++
# Project title.
title = "Project Tawasol: Connecting primary schools in Tunisia to create an Internet-empowered next generation"

# Date this page was created.
date = 2017-07-26T00:00:00

# Project summary to display on homepage.
summary = "*By Michael J. Oghia for the Internet Society*"

# Tags: can be used for filtering projects.
# Example: `tags = ["machine-learning", "deep-learning"]`
tags = ["Africa", "Digital Skills Training", "Youth"]

+++

The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) is one of the most dynamic
regions when it comes to Internet connectivity. Between its youthful
population, high rates of growth, and committed engagement by
professionals and volunteers from Morocco to Iran, the MENA region
presents [multiple
opportunities](http://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/global%20themes/middle%20east%20and%20africa/digital%20middle%20east%20transforming%20the%20region%20into%20a%20leading%20digital%20economy/digital-middle-east-final-updated.ashx)
for digital development and the proliferation of the Internet. Last
year, the Internet Society (ISOC)
[appointed](https://www.internetsociety.org/news/internet-society-opens-regional-bureau-middle-east-and-appoints-new-director)
a veteran Internet professional from the region, Salam Yamout, to direct
the newly established Middle East Bureau in Beirut, Lebanon, which
cemented ISOC's commitment to the
[region](http://www.internetsociety.org/what-we-do/where-we-work/middle-east).

An example of this commitment includes supporting a community network
based in Tunisia called Project Tawasol, which is led by the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers' (IEEE) Special Interest Group
on Humanitarian Technology (SIGHT) Tunisia
[Chapter](http://sight.ieee.tn/) and [People Centered
Internet](http://peoplecentered.net/). The aim of the project is to
connect primary schools across the country to the Internet, and train
students to use the Internet through information and communications
technology (ICT) skills workshops conducted by youth members of the
IEEE.

Tunisia has a long history with the Internet. In 1993, it became the
first country in the MENA region to connect, and had a front-and-center
position during the so-called Arab Spring almost 20 years later -- in
part due to the Internet. Thus, the Internet is hardly a new phenomenon
in the country. According to the International Telecommunications Union
(ITU), Internet penetration in Tunisia stood at 46 percent in 2014.
Moreover, a predominant majority of the population accesses the Internet
through mobile broadband subscriptions, with more than 4.5 million
subscriptions to 3G mobile data plans, which far exceeds the number of
fixed broadband subscribers -- around 500,000, and mainly in cities and
coastal areas.

As of 2016, however, only 48 percent of all schools in Tunisia had
access to an Internet connection, and not all of these schools are
equipped with computer labs with Internet-enabled devices that can train
these children with ICT skills and digital media literacy. Thus, many
students in Tunisia suffer from three key issues: lack of access to
Internet-enabled devices, a lack of training, and disparities in access.

The first problem is compounded by the fact that there are low rates of
home broadband connectivity in rural areas, so schools and community
anchor institutions are crucial points of contact for connecting to the
Internet. Furthermore, while ICT training is introduced at the higher
secondary level, at the age of 16, most students are unable to harness
the resources the Internet offers to them prior. Training teachers in
the latest technology is also very poor, which forms another challenge
to digital literacy education in Tunisia. Lastly, rural areas suffer the
most from the lack of Internet connectivity. In rural areas, wireless
connectivity is restricted to 2G networks, whose coverage is
particularly poor in remote areas in the interior regions of Tunisia.

Given the problems facing Tunisian youth, enter two of the project's
founders: Skander Mansouri and Ahmed Selmi. After recognizing the
abovementioned problems, they partnered with the IEEE SIGHT Tunisia and
San Francisco chapters as well as ISOC to provide students with small
Raspberry Pi operated devices with hard disks with relevant content such
as Wikipedia pages, TED Talks, and other educational content from the
Internet, which are also capable of automatically updating content when
connected to Wi-Fi or 3G networks.

In December 2016, the Sadiki School in Tunis was identified as the first
"Connected School" for the dissemination of these devices coupled with
digital literacy training workshops by members of IEEE SIGHT. With
support from the government, the project aims to connect 24 such schools
by the end of 2017 -- one school in each region within Tunisia,
impacting more than 1,000 students. The project focuses on primary
schools, with an aim to make the next generation aware of new
technologies and information that can be accessed through the Internet.
As part of the project, technical talks and digital literacy as well as
ICT training workshops are organized by IEEE SIGHT Tunisia. These talks
cover interactive sessions that teach students how to build their own
websites using drag-and-drop interfaces. Also, when the first workshop
was conducted in 2016, 50 percent of the participants were female -- a
key step in enabling gender parity in Internet access and skills.

During the digital literacy training workshops, students have built
their own prototype websites, such as a school blog using HTML, CSS, and
modular website building interfaces. The reactions in post-workshop
surveys conducted thus far have been tremendously positive as well.
"Most students asked us when we will return to provide them with their
own devices for development," Mansouri said.

Project Tawasol's success highlights three important reasons why
supporting digital media literacy and ICT skills are vital to
[connecting and enabling the next billion Internet
users](http://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/policy-options-for-connecting-and-enabling-the-next-billions-phase-ii).
Providing primary school connectivity is an important enabler of
education and opportunities for young students, as it provides access to
the vast troves of information that is available on the Internet.
Second, education and capacity building is a crucial component of
connectivity projects targeting youth. Such education is more successful
when conducted in an interactive setting and aimed at achieving an
output (such as a website). And third, lowering the cost of devices
needed to access the Internet can enable more students at an optimal
level, especially in rural areas and for poorer households where
affordability is a concern.

Youth are more than merely the future of the Internet; [they are the
present](https://www.internetsociety.org/blog/chapters-members/2016/03/youth-arent-future-we%E2%80%99re-present).
This is why it is critical that more youth-centric digital media
literacy training expand in the MENA region, and people like Skander and
Ahmed as well as projects like Tawasol continue to be supported to help
connect and enable, not simply the next generation of Internet users,
but the current one.

Read the [full case study](/project/africa_digitalskills_youth_projectawasoltunisia/)


