+++
# Project title.
title = "Partnering for Change through Community Networks: The Wireless for Communities Project (W4C)"

# Date this page was created.
date = 2017-06-28T00:00:00

# Project summary to display on homepage.
summary = "*By Kyle Shulman, Global Engagement Policy Manager, Internet Society and Udita Chaturvedi, Digital Empowerment Foundation*"

# Tags: can be used for filtering projects.
# Example: `tags = ["machine-learning", "deep-learning"]`
tags = ["Asia", "Community Network", "Digital Skills Training", "Gender"]
+++

With a population of more than 1.3 billion people, India presents one of
the biggest challenges to the endeavor to [connect the next
billion](http://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/policy-options-for-connecting-and-enabling-the-next-billions-phase-ii)
people to the Internet. Especially given the fact that 67% of all
Indians reside in small, often rural, villages, community networking is
proving to be a vital tool to assist in raising rural teledensity, which
currently rests at around 49%.

Given the challenges of providing Internet connectivity in rural and
tribal districts, the Internet Society (ISOC) partnered with New
Delhi-based Digital Empowerment Foundation (DEF) in 2010 to launch the
[Wireless for
Communities](http://wforc.in/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/W4CPhase-6-Project-Closure-Report_Ver-2.0-2.pdf)
(W4C) programme.

The programme focuses on two key areas: expanding access to adequate
infrastructure, and capacity and skill building. W4C deploys mesh
networks to set up and expand connectivity in rural locations around
India using low-cost, Wi-Fi-based equipment and unlicensed spectrumto
rural, remote and under-served communities. W4C involves line-of-sight
and low-cost Wi-Fi equipment, which utilise the unlicensed spectrum
bands --- 2.4 GHz and 5.8 GHz --- to create community-owned and
community-operated wireless networks in rural and remote locations of
India to democratise access and make it available to all. It also equips
community members through a training of trainers (ToT) project with the
skills to design, deploy, operate, and maintain wireless networks and
community infrastructure, with the goal of ensuring the project is
sustainable in the long-term.

The genesis behind the project was two-fold. First, the costs to deploy
traditional cell tower infrastructure in some rural areas of the country
remains high due to the local geographic terrain as well as the lack of
continuous access to electricity. Mainstream Internet Service Providers
(ISPs) are not willing to provide internet connectivity in these regions
as they feel their operations would not be commercially viable. Second,
low economic spending power, which results in a low return on investment
for service providers, and dispersed communities form other key
challenges for connectivity in general, but rural connectivity in
particular. Even in areas with infrastructure, people often lack the
skills to use the Internet to its full potential. The lack of content in
local languages as well as inadequate contextual information and
communications technology (ICT) training are reasons for less adoption
in rural areas as compared to urban areas.

Since its launch, the programme has connected rural and remote locations
in as many as 38 districts across 18 states of India with more than 200
access points, connecting lakhs of individuals. Further, the programme
has created rural women entrepreneurs & and wireless engineers who may
or may not have had any formal education. Additionally, W4C has been a
backbone for several of DEF's [Community Information Resource
Centres](http://www.circindia.org) (CIRCs) across India that require
Internet connectivity. CIRCs have helped villagers gain access to
digital literacy, digital tools, information available online, including
student exam results, and has even enabled people to open bank accounts
and get printouts of their individual Aadhaar (Unique Identification
Number) cards. The programme as a whole, but especially the CIRCs, also
has helped promote education as well as communicate the importance of
education.

A significant outcome of the W4C project includes the enabling of local
governments, community radio stations, and rural weavers to be
connected, expanding digital commerce in rural areas, and enabling
villages to access government services online and establish online
businesses. Furthermore, training for rural entrepreneurs through
resource centers as well as at the [Barefoot
College](https://www.barefootcollege.org/) have provided employment and
benefited people who wanted to start online businesses.

Over the years, several projects of DEF have been inspired by W4C's
wireless ecosystems and several other initiatives have emerged out of
the umbrella project. One such initiative has been Wireless Women for
Entrepreneurship & Empowerment (W2E2).Since the gender-gap is prominent
in India, W2E2 empowers women entrepreneurs through specific capacity
building efforts by providing them training to establish online
businesses.

In its latest phase, Phase VII, the project has connected 3,500 families
of the Agariya community (salt farmers) in the Little Rann of Kutch in
the Indian state of Gujarat through [Zero
Connect](http://www.wforc.in/zeroconnect). The project has been designed
innovatively using variety of wireless technology and devices, which are
built-in vehicle (mobile van).

Note on Zero Connect: The vehicle has rooftop solar panels, backup
batteries, an expandable and flexible 5-meter tripod-based antenna tower
with dish antenna. The dish antenna revolves 360 degree and depending
upon where the vehicle is parked, it aligns with the broadband Internet
tower at the periphery of the Little Rann of Kutch. The Zero Connect
vehicle reaches out to 17 schools and a number of settlements that
invariably lies at a distance of 20-50 kilometres from backhaul Internet
tower. The antenna on the vehicle catches internet from backhaul tower
using unlicensed spectrum with complete security and further allows wifi
access to local identified users in a radius of 100 meters.

Connectivity in rural areas has transformed information access in
numerous ways for these communities. W4C provided ICT training,
certification, and diploma courses on computer concepts, along with
telemedicine technology courses. Eleven out of the 13 schools in the
Chanderi cluster -- a highly populated area with marginalized handloom
weavers, located in the state of Madhya Pradesh -- have Wi-Fi
connections and computer centers.

As a result of wireless Internet and broadband through W4C, the weavers
of Chanderi are using e-commerce and Facebook to sell their crafts. In
Baran, anther rural community, digitally enabled services include
telemedicine, learning, and education through video conferencing, and
narrowcasting of community radio programs. Additionally, Barefoot
College uses this connectivity to upload water quality data online for
the purposes of policy advocacy.

Note on Baran: The Baran W4C network is one of the widest coverage
networks under the project. The network is spread across 200 kilometres;
and about 10 CIRCs, besides facilitating health and educational services
among others. Baran network serves Rajasthan's two tribal communities,
Bheel and Sahariya. Even if internet is down from backhaul, but still
communities living in two different villages can communicate using
intranet infrastructure that exist in the network. This way, they are
always connected either its internet or intranet.

As the W4C project aptly demonstrates, community mesh networks, when
coupled with training of barefoot engineers for the establishment and
maintenance of networks, can provide sustainable, low-cost connectivity
and enable information access in rural parts of the country.
Additionally, capacity-building initiatives through CIRCs can empower
rural entrepreneurs to leverage the Internet for consuming information
available online and for e-commerce, while connectivity to the most
rural areas can enable access to services such as e-governance and
telemedicine.

This has the potential to transform access to healthcare in areas that
traditionally are hard to reach, which currently leads to delays and
loss of lives. Lastly, the Internet allows content and services produced
in rural areas to reach a wide range of consumers outside the community.

Note on Barefoot Engineers: One of the objectives of W4C is to provide
wireless networking training to local community members in an effort to
transform them into barefoot wireless engineers for linking rural
population to the Internet; and to open up avenues for social
enterprises and NGOs as rural internet service providers. Guna in Madhya
Pradesh is a backward and tribal dominated region where a training
centre for this purpose has been established. It has created more than
30 barefoot wireless engineers so far.
