+++
# Project title.
title = "Leveraging satellite connectivity to close the rural educational gap in Latin America: ESCUELA+"

# Date this page was created.
date = 2017-06-06T00:00:00

# Project summary to display on homepage.
summary = "*By Michael J. Oghia and Colin Muller for the Internet Society*"

# Tags: can be used for filtering projects.
# Example: `tags = ["machine-learning", "deep-learning"]`
tags = ["Latin America and the Caribbean", "Digital Skills Training"]

+++

**ESCUELA+**

One of the Internet community's most pressing collaborative goals is to
"[connect the next
billion](http://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/policy-options-for-connecting-and-enabling-the-next-billions)".
In order to ensure that expanded access remains sustainable and relevant
to local communities, skills such as digital media literacy must be a
central component of any project. This is especially pertinent in Latin
America and the Caribbean, where individuals across the region are
working to connect schools and communities to the net, expand the
digital economy, and empower individuals with access to information.

One such program, ESCUELA+, uses satellite technology and solar-power to
connect rural schools in Latin America that do not have reliable
Internet access to high-quality educational content online. Since 2007,
this community-driven program has reached more than 1 million students,
65,000 teachers, and 6,800 schools in eight countries in Latin America,
including Colombia, Chile, Brazil, and Argentina. The initiative is
supported by a broad coalition of organizations, including AT&T,
DirecTV, National Geographic, Discovery, and Fundacion Torneos.

The challenges ESCUELA+ must overcome are numerous. The first includes
geographic barriers and the difficulties associated with connecting
remote areas. Rural areas frequently lack affordable Internet access,
and people who want to connect to the Internet often have to travel long
distances and incur large expenses to get reliable access. Additionally,
the education system in many rural areas in Latin America suffers from
incomplete or inconsistent access to quality teaching. This leads to
high repetition and dropout rates. Rural schools tend to be a low
priority for resource allocation because they are in areas with low
population density. Furthermore, the unavailability of educational
content in local languages is particularly acute for schools in rural
areas.

**The ESCUELA+ solution**

ESCUELA+ uses last-mile satellite connectivity (LMSC) to provide
educational content from high-quality sources such as the Discovery
Channel and National Geographic to students in rural schools. The
satellite connectivity provides access to this programing in any school
with a television and electrical power. Where electrical power is not
easily accessible, ESCUELA+'s Solar Initiative is deploying
solar-powered alternatives to make streaming educational content
possible. DirecTV's digital video recorder (DVR) facility allows
teachers to manage content and record more than 100 hours of programing
to integrate into their curriculum. Teachers are also trained to use
ESCUELA+ audio/visual technology, as well as the Discovery en la ESCUELA
pedagogy.

Using media, technology and digital satellite television, rural schools
are incorporating innovative teaching methodologies that are making a
tangible difference. Besides the numbers mentioned above, ESCUELA+ has
had a significant impact on educational achievement primarily in
underserved areas. Independent surveys conducted by the University of
Chile found that students in schools with ESCUELA+ performed
consistently better than control groups across all grade levels and
subjects.

Considering how central education is to alleviating poverty, community
initiatives such as ESCUELA+ are on the forefront of our work to improve
lives around the world. ESCUELA+'s success serves as an example for
similar initiatives around the world as it demonstrates that satellite
broadband can be an enabler of last mile connectivity in underserved
regions. Moreover, it teaches us that streaming educational videos can
help improve educational outcomes in rural communities.

Read the [case study](/project/lac_digitalskills_youth_escuelapluslatinamerica/)

