+++

title = "Establishing Telecommunications Infrastructure in Rural Areas:  Papua New Guinea’s Rural Communication Project – 2009 to the Present"

# Date this page was created.
date = 2017-04-12T00:00:00

# Project summary to display on homepage.
summary = "*By Kyle Shulman, Global Engagement Policy Manager, Internet Society*"

# Tags: can be used for filtering projects.
# Example: `tags = ["machine-learning", "deep-learning"]`
tags = ["Oceania", "Cellular Connectivity", "Universal Service"]

+++



In rural areas, even the simplest form of telephony can bring tremendous
economic and social benefit to a region. Communications networks provide
the means to not only connect remote areas to the rest of the world, but
also to function as a catalyst for the local economy.

A decade ago, in the Pacific island nation of Papua New Guinea, overall
Internet penetration was 20% for a population of 7.6 million. Access
levels were some of the lowest in the world with fixed broadband
penetration less than 1%. In 2007, the Papua New Guinean government
allowed for the privatization of the telecommunication market. Two new
mobile entrants joined the PNG market - Digicel and GreenCom. With the
arrival of these new players, access began to improve. Networks were
expensive to develop and investment in the projects took some time.
Other obstacles facing development of a communication infrastructure
included the deployment of traditional terrestrial infrastructure over
complicated terrain, and capacity constraints as existing fiber networks
did not have a high capacity backbone.

In 2009, The Rural Communications Project began and was projected to
provide Internet connectivity to rural and remote areas of the country.
The project received funding via the World Bank and was managed by the
National ICT Authority of Papua New Guinea (PNG). Initial mobile network
deployment saw 59 mobile base-stations deployed by Digicel in remote
areas of all four regions of this island-nation country, bringing
telecom connectivity to around 500,000 residents. Mobile base- stations
were coupled with solar charging stations to allow residents the
opportunity to charge their devices.

The project also provided technical assistance to the National
Information and Communications Technology Authority (NICTA) to address
emerging regulatory challenges and reinforce competition in the
telecommunication market. The World Bank also provided guidance to Papua
New Guinea's Department of Communication and Information (DCI) to
establish ICT policies such as the development of a universal-service
fund.

Since its inception in 2009, the World Bank invested \$15 Million into
PNG's Rural Communications Project, and mobile operators in PNG provided
investment that increased communication coverage to 90% nation-wide.
Through this deployment, social and economic benefits have been realized
as farmers are able to purchase supplies and crops over the phone. Women
in rural villages have purchased mobile phones and top-up cards, and are
renting their phones to others in the village for a small price.
Communication networks have also improved deployment of emergency
services to villages, preventing deaths by improving emergency response
time.

To learn more about the Rural Communications Project please see our [case
study](../project/oceania_connectivity_usf_ruralcommprojectpng).


